Why are you laughing? We're having a
conversation.
>> We're happy to be here talking to you in
the New York Times and all that, but
we're really here because we're hoping
to get on the cover of ARP.
>> This is the interview. I'm David Marches
and this week we have a first for the
show. I'm talking with a family. That's
Mandy Patinkin, his wife of 45 years,
Katherine Grody, and their son Gideon
Grody Patinkin. Mandy you probably know
as Inigo Mononttoya from The Princess
Bride.
>> My name is Inigo Montoya. You killed my
father. Prepare to die.
>> He also played Saul in Homeland and is a
Tony Award-winning actor in Broadway
musical theater. Catherine is an
award-winning actress, too, for her off
Broadway work, and she's also a
playwright and an author. So, this is a
highly accomplished couple. But that's
not why I wanted to talk to them. I
wanted to talk to them because during
the pandemic they became Tik Tok famous
for a series of videos filmed by their
son Gideon. These videos showed the
Patinkans at home together arguing with
each other.
>> I'm not elderly. This is not elderly.
>> And I think it's safe to say that a lot
of people online fell in love with them.
>> Our 42nd anniversary yesterday began
lovely and then turned into an absolute
fight and [__] show fight. Their family
life clearly resonates with people. So
much so that they've recently started
working on an advice podcast. And
they've also made a TV pilot of a show
that's based on a heightened version of
their own life. And it's called
Seasoned. I talked to Mandy and
Catherine about what it's like to become
social media stars in their 70s, about
Jewish identity today, and also about
building a family. And Gideon came along
too, both to help me wrangle his parents
and also to provide some useful
perspective. Here's my conversation with
the Grody Patinkin family.
>> Thank you all for being here. This is
the biggest group I've ever interviewed
before. To have a family also is very
nice.
>> You need to take some medication.
>> I might.
>> Maybe at the end. Maybe. We'll see how
it goes. So, in the social media post
where you said you were working on an
advice podcast, Mandy, you referred to
you two as messes.
>> Yes. Katherine, do you think that your
messes
>> Oh, definitely. Were what what do you
call purposeful messes? I mean, I
actually, it's interesting. I embrace
being messy more than I ever have as a
reaction against the whole AI chatbot,
you know, algorithm world. It's like, I
want to be messy. I want to be human. I
want to make mistakes. I want to
apologize. I want to be tactile, you
know. So, yeah, we're messes. your mind.
You're holding a cup. You can't
justiculate freely in your natural.
>> I want to just say I couldn't talk
because I didn't have my hands.
>> How would you talk without your hand?
>> I just want to say at the beginning uh
speaking of mess, I'm also a mess.
Emotionally a mess and um I lost a
friend and uh the memorial was on
Monday. um I needed to speak and and I
was extremely anxious about it and it
was very emotional and the stress was
intense and that's why I have this cold
sore on my lip which no matter what it's
going to be it's not going to be hidden
so I'm sorry I'm a member of Spinal Tap
>> right yes there's a scene so for people
who don't know there's a scene in Spinal
Tap where all the members of the band
>> have a cold you lean into it thank you
>> so back to her mess
>> yes
>> I mean how you know by mess I just mean
we're not careful with each other. We're
all react Well, he's not reactive and
our older son is not reactive because I
think in reaction to seeing us be so
immediately hysterical about things
their whole lives, they've learned to
embrace taking a breath. But but it's
funny over the years when I tried to
contain the mess, I now just think it's
human and I'm letting it out. Gideon, do
you think what your mom just described
about how your parents messiness maybe
uh led to a a counter uh or like a
particular emotional reaction from you?
Does that sound accurate? Is that how
you experienced it?
>> Yeah, 100 100%. I mean, they've been
great teachers in what to do in the
world and what not to do in the world.
And I think one of the the gifts is I've
seen their often hysterical emotional
uh
painful
response to things, not be in service of
their life and joy. And if they could
take a beat, take a moment and uh have a
little more perspective or gratitude or
just air in their lungs that they'd uh
enjoy their experience a bit more.
>> What do you think about the idea of your
parents making an advice podcast? Well,
I think that that idea and experiment
and and we're just in the process of
making a pilot right now to see what
that would be like is kind of like an
outgrowth of the conversations and play
we've been having creatively since uh
>> since co and you know these two never
think they have much interesting to
offer. um they talk, they respond
and communicate their life experience
and many people find it illuminating and
hilarious and bizarre and they see their
own parents in it. But um they're the
farthest thing from thinking that they'd
have any advice uh to give. One of the
potential ideas for the name of it was
don't listen to us. just to clarify that
these two uh don't have any expertise
>> in anything.
>> Do you two have a hunch for why people
respond so positively to you? What's
your Yeah. What's your your thinking?
>> I have a couple. First of all, all of
this was an accident of the pandemic.
People were terrified. They were stuck
in their homes. And I think we were
unknowingly an antidote to the youth
bias in the culture. So that for people
that couldn't get to their parents or
couldn't get to their grandparents and
they were stuck and terrified. One, we
seemed to offer some comfort or warmth.
A and I think it shows that people don't
have in general the bias about elders or
people with white hair that the culture
would think that you do. You know, I've
been furious about this for years since
I was like 50. Do you know because you
don't
>> you used to if somebody would offer her
a seat on the subway that was a big
mistake.
>> She would tear into them like a really
crazy person, but now it's a little
different.
>> I used to pity these people that would
try to help her.
>> No, there was this one woman once. I
remember I just come from working two
hours in the gym. You know, I get on the
subway. I have my New York Times in one
hand. and I'm holding on to the bar or
the other and I see this young woman get
up and I actually thought oh that's
really nice that she notices some older
person needing is that for me
>> right
>> you're standing up for me I just was at
the gym for two hours and she's like I'm
so sorry I'm so sorry I'm not from New
York I was taught to be nice to all
people
>> that was maybe 15 years ago and now
you're like
>> now I'm like excuse me excuse me
>> I can't figure it out I I don't
understand it. I understand the logic of
why they would pay attention to us. I
mean, there's a lot in this world I
don't understand. And that is one of the
things because we're just we just be
we're just ourselves.
>> But it brings it back to the mess that
you talked about, David.
>> I think that authenticity, we're not
selling anything. I have no brand of
makeup. Obviously,
>> that's not always true. Sometimes you're
selling yourself.
>> Sometimes you're selling. Sometimes I
take a little kombucha, you know, like
I'm drinking it or something and then I
can't say it right. Then he makes fun of
me and the next thing we know we get
boxes of it.
>> That's not that's not what I mean. Those
are happy little accents where you get a
free thing, but you're not sponsoring
anything.
>> I mean that we started sharing things
with no intention of self-promotion or
anything. And that's like a very pure
thing. And the initial intention was to
get more eyeballs on posts about the
International Rescue Committee and
support of refugees and uh around the
world, which they've always been
attached to. But as time goes on and you
build a following, then sometimes you do
have a project that you're making a post
about or sharing. I mean, mom's got, you
know, a a play she wrote coming up. So,
we do I just want to be truthful. like
we're not selling anything.
>> But the purity of the initial thing can
change
>> and it and it has changed. The reason
that we're here today in truth is we're
having the lawns say and we're hoping
that we'll we'll give the address before
it's over. We have wonderful items and
we're hoping that will come gently used,
some broken, but you know, you can get
them fixed.
>> Lovely bench.
>> Lovely bench. The bench. Oh, don't talk
to me about the bench. I'd give that one
away. a bench that she insisted on
buying that nobody sits on because it
will [__] you instantaneously.
But there it sits in the center of the
room. The kids don't love sitting on it.
>> They never sit on it.
>> Stop her.
>> They don't.
>> Feel free to stop that. Come over. Come
over. Set up a camera. You know, night
vision, whatever you want. Children
don't sit on the bench.
>> David, to get you through this family
experience, we give you cart blits
on the bench. I have to say, even just
in the in the few minutes we've been
talking, the the way that you two
instinctively
uh held each other's hand, Yeah.
>> the way that you, Catherine, patted down
Mandy's hair,
>> what's left
>> what's left of Mandy's hair. Um, it's
very it's it's just very sweet. And I
I'm curious sort of h how are there ways
in which you see your dynamics as having
changed over the years? Because I the
way I I often think about it is, you
know, it's sort of early in a
relationship is when kind of like the
the uh dynamics get established and then
it seems to me that things like solidify
and everyone plays their roles and
there's not a ton of deviation. But you
know what? I've only been married 14
years, so
>> baby beginning.
>> Can you tell me about how how your sort
of roles with each other have changed or
not
>> over time?
>> You go first.
>> I think there is so much Sturman drawn
in the beginning of relationship. Do you
know? Um I mean I'm six years older than
him. I had had two serious
relationships. Uh when I met him, I
considered him I mean the only thing I
knew when I was 20, I was going to have
a life in the theater. I was going to be
a mom different than my mom, but I was
going to be a mom and I was never going
to have anything to do personally with
an actor cuz I thought one in the family
was enough. I was right. At our first
date, very first date, he said, "Before
we eat, I'm going to tell you, I'm going
to marry you."
>> Right?
>> Okay. I had not had coffee with this
guy. I really thought he was insane. And
I said, "Well, I don't believe in
marriage, so that's not going to
happen." 6 weeks later after we had been
dating, he said, "Let's just, you know,
stop
>> stop dating.
>> Stop dating." Yeah.
>> So, he went from, "I'm going to marry
you,
>> you two. Let's stop dating."
>> Okay.
>> I think he wanted to still sleep
together, but basically, stop having a
relationship. She was not my thing. And
we went to the
>> I don't know if that's true. I'd just
like to have my lawyer here for the rest
of this conversation. Go ahead. We went
to the reflecting pool at Lincoln Center
and you know I said if you can let go of
the future and if I can let go of the
past and we can just be in this moment
let's take it dayto day and here we are
45 years later you know it's all that
you don't know David you know am I going
to find my person then the person you
find is totally not who you expected to
find and it's all the unknowns that you
you know a rabbi at our wedding said
marriage is a real leap of faith you
don't know it's Being a parent, too. You
hope you'll be a good parent. You'll
hope, you know, if you were lucky enough
to have good ones, you'll make some
improvements, but who knows? It brings
up all sorts of stuff about how you were
parented, you know, and just beginning
careers and children and figuring out
what our differences were. There was
just so much high drama and joy and
passion and but it was also exhausting.
>> You asked about what's the trick? What's
the secret? Why are we together?
>> How the roles that you play with each
other either have or haven't changed
over time.
>> Have or haven't changed.
>> Yeah.
>> Well, two things that I've noticed.
>> One,
there were times where things got pretty
scary, ugly, frightening. Maybe we made
a mistake. We were separated, I think,
on two occasions. I think once for six
or eight weeks and then once for like 2
or 3 months.
>> Right. You referred to these periods as
the troubles. the trouble, right? Yeah,
I got it pretty close.
>> And but we we saw each other every day.
We spoke every day. We met at popovers
on Columbus every day next to next to uh
Barney Greenrass
on Amsterdam next to Barney Greengrass.
Every day, every day we were to we
couldn't be apart. And so on our 25th
wedding anniversary, she gave me this
wedding ring, this silver one, and it
has two bumps on it to represent our two
troubles. And from those troubled times,
I feel that during the previous times
when somebody said this to me once, I
thought this when you can't even watch
the person you chose to live your life
with eat, it so repulses you. You can't
watch them eat. You don't want to hear
them speak. You're just looking for the
exit constantly.
I just learned let it go and move on as
the song says. And but something's
happened.
>> He's talking about the song from Sunday
in the Park with George. Not frozen the
>> Oh no frozen frozen yogurt
letting go from
>> No, it's called. So, but but but the key
thing that I feel has changed
is um time and and what it means. And
Katherine
would like like she said be in a rage if
you tried to give her a seat on the
subway and you know things that had to
do with age or whatever. But she has
stopped obsessing and screaming about
aging and being terrified. What's
changed is she's not worrying
about time like she used to. She
recognizes
it has moving way too fast and if we if
we commiserate about it and worry about
it and complain about it, we're going to
miss a lot.
>> Yeah.
>> And that has changed exponentially.
And I I'm so grateful that we've
accepted
that we're older and there's such
benefits to it. So we're we're always
saying to each other, if you could be
whatever age, what age would you be? And
I would say, well, I'd be 25, the age I
was when I met you. Only if I could know
what I know now.
>> You take away what I know now. All bets
are off.
>> Talk to me. What? Well, you're a little
skeptical.
>> I know. I just I mean, it's M
>> completely different response. I'm just
listening to this seeing what parts of
it I identify with or not. I mean the
the question was what has changed over
the years, David? And
>> first of all, it's all the things you
don't know, you know, it's are you going
to be are you going to be able to have
children? Are you going to be a good
parent? Are you going to still be able
to work? Are we going to be able to make
a living? Do you know? And it's also I
think at the beginning of the
relationship you make a lot of
assumptions about commonalities because
there were certain things that drew you
together and you make big assumptions
about what those things are and then
when you commit to each other you
discover oh I I'm a social person. He is
not a social person. Do you know I love
people. He is more
>> he likes some people.
>> He likes some people. I was going to say
I was going to say selective.
>> Okay. one,
>> you know,
>> nice rosemary. Rosemary
in the abstract. They all got in the
article. Look up that,
>> you know. So, I think the inherent
>> Well, I'm sorry. What? I didn't hear
you.
>> The inherent tension
>> of not knowing, you know, all of those
things brings out the best and worst in
you, you know. And uh I mean, it was
very funny recently. We were talking
about when the kids were little and I
mentioned that when he was 4 days old
>> and our oldest son was four, Mandy came
to Central Park, we had a birthday party
for the four-year-old and then kissed us
goodbye and went to Europe for several
months to do Princess Bride. So what we
were talking about and I was alone with
the four day and Mandy went I would
never have done that. That didn't
happen. I said, "Honey, who you are now
wouldn't have done it, but who you were
then?" Yes. Yes, you did that. No,
Catherine, that's not And I had to go
back and
>> although Yeah, that could be fact
checked pretty easily.
>> I came when he was 3 months old, honey.
So, you didn't see him for 3 months. And
when we arrived,
>> I was still sore about it.
>> Yeah.
>> But get it. Have you have you seen a
change in your parents' relationship?
>> Uh, yeah, totally. I mean in their
troubled times there was a there was a
period when they split up and I was
teenager I think
>> 16.
>> Yeah. That I was I was sort of at a
certain point happy for them. I was like
these are two people who were so inshed
and codependent and like might be having
an experience in their adulthood where
they could uh get to discover who they
are without the other and that could be
really great for both of them in
different ways. And then I saw two
people who were trying to separate
completely incapable of being away from
the other. And I remember thinking as
they were getting back together like I
just kind of gotten used to the idea of
them being part. I was like kind of
excited for how they'd develop in ways
that maybe they couldn't while stuck
together. But that was a long time ago
>> and we haven't developed at all.
>> That was 20 years ago. And now I've
gotten to see two Mishuga people, you
know, stick it out um for for better and
worse. And you know, that's that's a
beautiful thing. And Catherine, you were
going to That's what I was going to say.
One of the bigger things is I think in
the initial coming together of
relationship, you assume you're one
person, which is a big error. You know,
I I never understood that that settling
down thing. You know, I thought of dust
mites when you shake a blanket. It's
like who that who he is, who I am, and
who we are as a couple. And I think it
takes a long time to figure out that you
have permission to be your totally
different selves and who you are as a
couple. And so I would always, you know,
I understand I would try and fix what
ailed him for years, which just usually
had the opposite effect of making things
worse. And I would also try and talk him
into, you know,
>> things that I wanted him to be at. And
now,
>> so you're doing that less
>> and I do it a lot less. I just say
whatever you need to do. And if he has
permission to do whatever he needs to
do, he most often shows up than not. So
it is not being threatened by the fact
that you're two really different people
that have chosen to share a life and
make a life and make family together.
>> But there's Mandy, you have something to
add.
>> Yeah. Two things I bring me back to the
word fix, but also I want to talk about
your question being together. I I wish
for everyone to have a companion. to to
go through life with, to do nothing
with, to have in the other room, to just
think about calling. You don't have to
be married. I don't care what the
circumstances are but someone when you
meet that someone
if you're lucky which many people are
and you feel that something that you
cannot put into words that is what you
should hope and pray for and be
available to the possibility of that
taking place in your existence. And the
thank god part of that is when the [__]
hits the fan, and in every relationship,
if it's worth its salt, it will hit the
fan. You will reflect on that moment in
the beginning of hello where you
couldn't put into words what you felt
about that person. And that is the gold
thing. The other word you hit on that I
heard, I think Katherine said it was
fix.
>> Fix.
>> The word fix. And my teacher for the
past since about 2005 or six started
teaching me the Buddhist idea
of of stay in the moment and don't be in
the past or the future and don't try to
fix what's wrong. You know, you fix
things in every imaginable way. You you
drink it, you drink yourself, you eat
yourself, you divorce, you run away.
Fix, fix, fix. As opposed to staying in
that discomfort. One of my favorite
things was with little babies when they
fall down, you say, "Let me kiss it and
make it go away."
>> Uhhuh.
>> Don't make it go away. Kiss it if you
want to, but it doesn't have to go away.
It hurts. It's okay. And and um I just
think the whole world would be better if
if we learned to stay with our
discomfort, learn to live with it. Stop
running away. Stop trying to fix
everything.
>> And um I could go on, but that's
made me emotional.
>> I somehow wanted that. I somehow wanted
to just cuz that's a teaching of my
life. If I was on my deathbed and and
you said anything last thing other than
love to the kids and grandkids and
Catherine, I I would I would try to
communicate this idea of just be in this
moment.
>> Oh, Katherine, go ahead.
>> No, go ahead. You
>> have David as
>> you know I can sum up one a huge
difference just occurs to me.
>> Yes, go for it. And then I have then I
do have another question.
>> Sometimes sometimes interviewers with
these two just need ask one question.
really.
>> But yeah,
>> no, it's just very funny. I used to want
to share my feelings about politics,
about a book I read, about an article,
about a person, and it would drive him
crazy, and he would say, "I just want
you to be a person in the a body in the
other room." And I would be furious. A
body in the other room, get one of those
dolls they have in
>> which we looked into.
>> Yeah. And now it's just so funny. I
found that so insulting in the beginning
of our relationship.
>> It sounds dehumanizing.
>> Dehumanizing. and not seeing me and my
needs and screw you. Now it's I'm really
I know what that means. The comfort of
just having somebody you know really
well. There's company there and we're
sharing the same space but very
comfortably being each other's body in
the other room and knowing we're there.
Um, this is sort of a a
difficult question, but I uh but you
know, all three of you are um
>> well, you're I was about to say
obviously, but I don't want to uh assume
anything, but you're Jewish.
>> Yes.
And you you um are also sort of uh
politically active in your way including
on social media and and you know you
talk about your hope for a ceasefire in
in Gaza and um the tragedy of that
situation and then you know that that's
on sort of one side and then you know
also just by nature of being Jewish at
this moment in history the anti-semitism
is obviously heightened right now. It
can be a a conflicting set of feelings
for for Jewish people. I'm I'm Jewish
also. And I just wonder,
>> are you thinking or feeling any
differently about what it means for you
to be Jewish in in this moment?
>> Yes, I am. I'll let them go first.
>> I hate the way some people are using
anti-semitism,
>> right? that claim
>> as a claim for anybody that is critical
about a certain policy, you know, as far
as I am concerned,
compassion for every person in Gaza, you
know, is very Jewish.
And the fact that I abhore the policies
of the leader of that country does not
mean I'm a self-hating Jew or I'm
anti-Semitic. You mean Netanyahu when
you say the the leader of that could be
>> Benjamin Netanyahu?
>> Yes. I uh I I feel this is the behavior
the politics of what he's doing is the
worst thing for Jewish people. It's like
lighting a candle for anybody that has
any anti-semitic feelings. It's creating
a generation of wounded and hurt kids
who will understandably be very angry.
So that is how I feel and I feel um I
really feel deeply troubled and
horrified by what is happening in my
name because it is the opposite. You
know it's that old hurt people hurt
people thing. I I see people acting the
way they supposedly created a place out
of the horror of the hatred. So I am
I am very proud of every Jewish person
that stands up for the humanity of
people in the Middle East is what I
feel.
>> May I do you get Do you want to speak
first please?
>> So I'm sitting here praying as I'm
listening to Katherine.
I'm asking Hashem, who I like to refer
to, and ask for his strength for me to
be of service to your question. I'm
going to say several things, and if I go
over all over the place for a minute,
I'll try to make sense.
>> Okay?
>> I want to take you back for a moment. I
came back from Europe after working. We
had our firstborn son, Isaac Grody
hyphen Patinkan, and he was about this
big on my arm. He came to about here.
would suck on my bicep and give me a
hickey. And I was asked to sing the
Israeli national anthem at one dog
Hammershold Square in front of the UN
for a Soviet jewelry rally. I believe I
was on the podium with my baby son. Ed
Cotch was sitting behind us and a
stranger was next to me. I didn't know
who he was,
but he had a very
distasteful vibe.
And I took my baby son and I moved him
from my left arm between the stranger
and me to my right arm. So my baby would
be between Mario Cuomo and me, not
between this man. This man got up to
speak and I remembered that uh he was uh
introduced uh as uh the ambassador from
Israel to the United Nations.
And I remember sitting there because I'd
often hear my parents say this phrase on
the south side of Chicago in the Jewish
community. That's good for the Jews or
that's bad for the Jews. And in my mind
out loud I heard that's the definition
of what's bad for the Jews. And I didn't
know this man. I knew nothing about him.
I just knew he was a threat to my child.
And later I learned that that man was
named Benjamin Netanyahu.
>> And I loved that I had no idea who he
was or what his position meant.
>> You felt the vibes.
>> I felt it. Then I don't remember exactly
when. I think what age it was a while
ago, 10, 15 years ago. I was in
Philadelphia getting ready to do a
concert with Patty, my dear friend Patty
Leone. And I go up to the hotel room.
Katherine was in the hotel room and uh
the movie The Princess Bride was on. She
was watching it and just as I walked in
the room is that final scene in the
movie where Inigo is sitting by the
window with the man in black and the man
in black asks Enigo would he like to be
the next Dread Pirate Roberts and the
Enigo Montoya actor who was me
at at 36 years old I think some it was
1986 do the math I was born in 52
>> said these words said these words which
I did not really know what they meant
that William Goldman wrote, which I
think are the singular greatest words
I've ever read. And those words are,
were, and always will be. You know, I
have been in the revenge business so
long.
Now that it's over, I do not know what
to do with the rest of my life. And I
ask Jews all over the world to consider
what this man, Benjamin Netanyahu, and
his right-wing government is doing to
the Jewish people all over the world.
They are endangering not only the state
of Israel, which I care deeply about and
want to exist, but they are endangering
the Jewish population all over the
world. He is the most dangerous thing
not just since October 7th. It is it has
been a a a deeply troubled situation
>> and endangering the Jews by endangering
those in Gaza and to watch what is
happening for the Jewish people. to
allow this to happen to children and
civilians of all ages in Gaza for
whatever reason is unconscionable and
unthinkable. And I ask you Jews
everywhere all over the world to spend
some time alone and think, is this
acceptable and sustainable?
How could it be done to you and your
ancestors? and you turn around and you
do it to someone else.
>> Yeah, I uh I appreciate
>> your your all of your honesty, but you
know, maybe
I think I'm going to take a sip of
water.
>> Yeah. Just get just give a moment.
>> Yeah. And then
I, you know, we're we're
in whether Jewish, not Jewish, whatever
you believe politically or or about the
world, it does feel like we're
living at a moment that's sort of
pervasive uh with uncertainty and
despair. Um, but I think it's
hugely
important just as a person as as best
you can to not succumb to to despair.
And I I I want to know how like
where and how you find joy in the world.
>> Can I chime in?
>> Yes.
Uh,
I think one little place I find joy in
the world and that I remind my parents
often is just, you know, being very
proud of them when they speak up
uh
for things they believe in. And uh
yeah, it always feels good to remind
them that I'm
you know always proudest of them when
they speak for people who have less
power and are being harmed.
>> And Catherine you have more.
>> No, that's that's just a point.
>> Put your arm down. You're blocking.
>> Where where do you find the sources of
joy in
>> her grandchildren?
>> Yeah. Tell me on the floor. Tell me
about your grandchildren.
>> They they It's such a strange thing. I
still can't get over that I'm old enough
to be a grandmother. I mean, my parents
didn't get that gift. And so I am very
grateful for it. And the sense of wonder
my grandson, my granddaughter is nine
months old, but she's just simply she
sees you and she goes,
"And I remember this."
>> Yeah. And I remember being out on a deck
when a sudden downpour happened. I mean,
just, you know, one of those things like
>> God dumped water and and our grandson
was 18 months old and he was there and
his response, David, was just
I mean, he thought it was so
extraordinary that this thing was
happening. And it it was the same thing.
I remember walking with him in the fall
and he said, "Look, Grande, the leaves
are yellow." And I remember thinking,
"Yeah, it's going to be one of those
yellow falls. Where's the red?" And I
stopped myself and went, Jesus, what is
with me?
>> That is your lesson. That is your
challenge of this chapter.
>> This is it.
>> To notice the yellow leaves. to notice
the yellow leaves and to uh suck in and
drink that wonder and joy and that is my
antidote to grief.
>> I think you guys find joy still in you
know the creative practice. I mean, dad
with your, you know, singing and mom, I
mean, we had an incredible time making
this TV pilot together and writing this
show, which came out of their incredibly
generous willingness to let me and my
dear friend and collaborator Euan Wright
uh take their most vulnerable lived
experiences and write stories with them
and turn them around and say, "Look,
these things that felt painful or
embarrassing or useless or a waste of
your time or the family's time can
actually be like relatable, hilarious,
connective tissue for other
>> and the show is essentially I saw the
pilot. It's essentially a fictionalized
version of your relationship.
>> Yes.
There's a a scene in the pilot where you
know you two or your characters
you and your charact
responsibility for
>> you're you're you have this big argument
>> and you Catherine uh have this line that
you say to Mandy where you know it's
something to the effect it's you know
it's not always easy because you take up
all the space
>> your feelings are so big
yours have to shrink Um
h how I'm you know assuming that you
figured out how to work through that
problem or manage it. H how did you do
that?
>> I think it was a weird trick. Um, it was
very easy to avoid my own Michigan
because his was so big and you know I
once said publicly I was supposed to
marry I rock so I could be the lunatic I
am and instead I married a lunatic so I
have to pretend to be a rock and um
>> don't forget to say I'm not always
>> and he's not always a lunatic at all and
in fact came up very natural
>> I I have my own lunaticness and I think
that um I realized at a certain point
that I could avoid dealing and improving
on my issues. Uh I could avoid it
because I was so busy taking care of
him.
>> And you do that with your children
>> and I do that with my children.
>> I've said to you, I said, "Mom, you
know, I really also want to be good
friends with you, but that involves
being able to communicate things that
aren't positive in my life." It's very
difficult to do that with you when
you're so ravenous to take your
children's problems or anybody else's
problems and then blow them up and make
them a bigger thing and repeat them to
your friends and live in them so that
you can avoid your own life.
>> And I think that's something
that's an improvement, right?
>> Sort of.
>> We're getting there.
>> I actually had emailed Gideon.
>> Yeah. uh maybe last week or something
and asked him because he obviously knows
you a lot better than I do.
>> He knows us well.
>> Uh you know, are there any things that
might be interesting to
>> ask your parents that they haven't been
asked before? And he sent me very
generously sent me a a long pretty long
a long list comprehensive.
>> You feel free to publish it as a book.
And one of the things uh that he brought
up was that um you know he's noticed
that you Katherine uh seemed to have
developed an interest in uh sort of
expanding the mind a little bit. You
know sort of he said that you've gotten
into astrology or learning about string
theory. Uh I think the way you put it
was you know you're that you Katherine
are toying with the idea of taking
psychedelic mushrooms. Uh-huh. Uhhuh.
>> Um, and I I want to know sort of do do
you think about the the balance between
sort of pushing yourself intellectually
and and emotionally as you get older
versus a completely understandable
comfort with,
you know, just just being who who you
are and and uh kind of settling down,
not in not in a negative way, you know.
I there's an aspect of this is who I am.
All those questions about will I find
love? Will I be a mother? Will I have a
career? Will those have all been settled
but I don't feel who I am sitting here
right now is who I want to be in 10
years or 20 years. I would I cannot I'm
so drawn to physics. The concept of one
thing being in two places at one time.
There was this article in the Atlantic
June of 23 called something about we're
all part of the cosmos but you still
have to buy groceries.
I cannot tell you David my brain is not
able to really grock those concepts but
I am so drawn to the description that
we're all part of a cosmic come that
energy really doesn't ever die. I read
this article and I said to my director
we were doing a workshop and I said I
have to put this in tonight. This is the
thing about time. It's about time we
don't ever really die. Oid was right.
Whitman, they're all right. It just
transforms. And she's just going, "What?
What are you talking about?" And I did
try and put it in that night and it was
a complete disaster. But I want I want
not to be afraid to learn new things or
change my mind about things. You know, I
am very drawn to the idea of micro
doing. You know,
>> you're drawn to the idea of all kinds of
dosing. You just haven't crossed over
yet. I've learned something that uh
works every time.
>> Which is why
>> Oh, no. Honey, it's not going to work
now.
>> It will work.
>> No, it won't.
>> Not Not if I tell you I adore you.
>> Wait, tell me.
>> She laughs. Whenever I say I adore her,
>> she can't stop laughing when I say
something else.
>> No, I want to just tell her I adore you.
Anytime I say I adore you, she starts
laughing.
>> It's just a very funny thing.
>> But why do you think that is? Because
honey, it does not the word does not
accurately describe your feelings toward
me on a 24-hour basis.
>> So, Mandy, how do you think about, you
know, sort of at at your age um
balancing, you know, still wanting to
grow and learn new things and and and
change.
>> Yes.
>> Versus
>> this is it,
>> you know, an understand an
understandable inclination maybe to just
rest in who you are. resting in who I am
will bore the [__] out of me and um and
dissatisfy me. I have so much growth to
do. I came to puberty very late. Mark
Fryfeld in the sixth or seventh grade
said, "What's the matter thinking? You
don't have any pubic hair yet?" Well,
I'm just trying
>> You were just speaking metaphorically at
first.
I tried to get back at Mark Fryfeld
forever because uh I was late to
everything and I'm late to being a human
being and growing up and changing. I
struggle continuously
with um
panic attacks,
>> with anxiety, with trying to live that
lesson of being in the moment and not
going back and not going forward, but
being right here. And I I want to get
better at it before it's over.
>> And you've gotten so much better at you.
You have that [__] under control in a
way that in a way that you can't see or
understand because you live with that.
But those around you see a person who
has learned that part of themselves and
learned to manage it and learned to
>> deal with it beautifully.
>> Thank you. But but when Oh gosh, where
was I going? Where was I going? Oh, but
Catherine Catherine sometimes and she's
gotten so much better at it since all
the changes have gone on in the world.
She'll go to sleep reading every uh
difficult article, you know, dark stuff,
every podcast, and then she goes to
sleep crying, wakes up the crying, and
she wakes up with me. So, I'm the first
one who hears the tears and needs to be
held and everything. And we're begging
her as a family, please stop reading
everything. Please stop listening to the
podcast. Please put other things in your
way. It's it's an addiction that she
works very hard at trying to break.
>> I mean, she's not alone, right? not
addiction. But there are moments that
are going on in this world, in this
life, at this moment, globally, home,
everywhere, in our personal lives, in
every aspect that put me in the reverse
gravity chair the other day and I'm
upside down with my head back and I
can't and I'm weeping for maybe 35, 45
minutes and Katherine and I couldn't
control it. I just couldn't hold I just
couldn't hold on anymore. But she just
sat next to me, didn't say a word, and
just held my hand. And I started to get
it together. And then it would come
again. The floods would come again. And
she just held my hand till we were done.
And then we went to the kitchen, I
think, and we had more of her number one
dish, which was rice and vegetables that
you have to put on so much dish and
special sauce that Gideon brings to make
it taste like something. But but we made
it through it and and I believe I
believe we'll I believe there's so much
good ahead.
Um go ahead. Ask the next question.
>> You you uh pretty clearly uh let it all
hang out uh and do it in public. Is
there is there anything that you think
that you would like people to know about
the Patinkin Grody family that maybe
they don't already?
>> We've given up on boundaries. No, we'd
like to take things back. They don't
They know too much.
>> They do know. Yeah, I believe in
boundaries actually because I do too. I
was kidding.
>> But it's a very uh we just stretch them.
>> After the break, I get more quality time
with the Grody Betink family.
>> You guys can hear me? Okay.
>> Yeah.
>> Yes.
>> All right. So, Mandy and Katherine,
where are you? We are in upstate New
York at the place we've had since our
oldest son was two and we came very very
periodically because of our
unpredictable schedules and then in the
pandemic this is where we came to wade
that out. I am a deeply urban person so
I'm still adjusting.
>> Gideon, where are you? Are you at home?
Uh, no. I'm in a big um artists uh
collective uh studio in Jersey City.
>> What are you doing there, kid?
>> I am uh doing a variety of things.
>> That is a child's answer to a parent if
I ever heard one.
>> Always undercover.
>> Yeah.
>> Wait. you know, when we spoke last time,
I I had uh I had asked if there are
things that are kind of offlimits for
the public and you said there are
boundaries. Um so without being specific
or where are your boundaries for what
you'll share with the public?
>> Go ahead.
>> Go ahead, kid.
>> It's a good question. I think you guys
would would stay uh
well you I I find that you often put up
a boundary for yourself and as soon as
you claim there's something or a space
you don't want to share or talk about
you might enter into that space but it's
about knowing that you can feel you
don't have to talk about anything that
allows you to talk about more than you'd
expect.
>> Would you agree?
>> No. No photographs and or videos of our
grandchildren
>> is certainly one. Well, sometimes we say
a name. I think we have and but no
videos. That's one thing. And and just
an endless list, an endless list of all
the things that are deeply personal and
deeply private in both our personal
lives, our family lives with our
children, um our lives individually, uh
the professional things. Uh the list is
uh is is everything that everybody has
on their list, things that are just too
private. Um we it seems like we'll talk
about anything, but we're very selective
and and the beauty which we do not have
the luxury of uh while we talk to you is
when we do social media or anything uh
social media particularly, Gideon is
also the editor, not just the
interviewer. And um and that gives a
great sense of safety.
>> You know, it's it's it's respecting the
privacy. We've been very open about what
we call our troubles, our true
separations, you know, years ago. But
I'm not going into the specifics of
that. The only people that need to know
about is me and him and you know what we
want to share with our kids. So that's
an area. You know, I once did a play
years ago at the public called Falling
Apart Together because I was frustrated
with people being together for 2 years,
separating, having nothing marriage for
two years, separating. And I wanted to
show how a family could go through
wonderful things, horrible things, and
then infold all of that in their story.
And I was insensitive. I used my kids'
real names because I was advised to. I
thought they were years away from how I
was portraying them. And I really
learned a lesson, David, about
respecting my my sense of my privacy,
about my life is one thing, but I really
have to respect what they feel
comfortable sharing and not sharing.
>> Katherine, you you you did talk about
this idea of um I think the way you put
it was uh lunatics and rocks and how,
you know, you're sort of maybe more
naturally a lunatic, but you kind of had
to be a a rock. H how did you how did
you learn to be a rock? God, David, you
ask really good questions.
Um,
I think I love this guy a lot and I
loved I really needed my family uh to be
an intact family. Um, because my parents
died when I was 25 and I think I didn't
realize how much that impacted me in
terms of family. Separation was kind of
death, you know. And I honestly think
even though I have lunatic qualities, I
am also even though I find it boring,
I'm kind of a rock, you know. I kind of
naturally I'm a rock.
>> You're you're a pretty rock.
>> Thank you.
>> I mean, therapy helps.
>> Oh, yeah. Therapy helps.
And having to be where your kids need
you to be. You know, they gave a
structure. That was sort of a rocklike
place, too. Um
>> Gideon I'm sorry. Go ahead.
>> Yeah, go ahead.
>> You know, you you from our brief time
together, you sure seem like a rock. Do
>> Thank you.
>> Do you have any lunatic in you?
>> My He was talking to me.
>> Oh.
rocks than either of us could ever be.
Let him answer the question. He's
asking, "Do do I have any lunatic in
me?"
Um, I mean, you know, my my family would
probably have a different uh response to
this question, as would my partner, but
um
I think
uh I definitely get
very like hot and tense inside, but I
think that's in part a result of having
like very emotional parents and a very
emotional like father and uh and and
maybe countering that. So, I think most
of my lunatic is tight and contained
within me. Maybe that's my it's a toxic
masculinity influence. Who knows? Mandy,
you know, I I I read about this um kind
of incredibly intense formative
experience you had uh in your family as
a young man where your father was ill
with cancer and then for some reasons
the your family decided not to tell your
father that it was cancer, that it was
terminal and and you know that you sort
of all engaged in this deception in the
in the hopes of uh not crushing his his
spirit and and you found that experience
kind of so difficult or distasteful that
as a result like you you had a real um
hunger and yearning for the truth moving
forward. You you you only wanted
honesty. And I would be very surprised
if sort of your own family dynamic, the
the four of you, including your other
son, involved something quite as intense
as that. But but do you think there is
sort of a uh kind of like a Rosetta
Stone incident for the family or
>> can you define what a Rosetta Stone
incident is?
>> Just something something that explains
uh the the dynamics of the family.
>> Well, I can only explain it through the
window of my existence. I I you are
correct. did was it was one of if not
the singular most formative event that
took place in my younger years. um that
the truth means everything to me almost
to a fault because I feel that I don't
deserve to live if I do a take while I'm
making a movie with Elmo and my
concentration failed while I was talking
to Elmo and I'm back in my trailer
literally thinking about calling my
therapist because I failed Elmo. And
that's to the degree what of of what I'm
dealing with here. And um uh I I um I
remember
Catherine uh had said to me when we
first met uh right off the bat, I can't
remember the exact phrase, honey. I know
you'll correct me, but if it was like if
I wandered from the, you know, the nest
and and uh flirted with somebody or
kissed somebody or whatever that she
needed to know, I had to tell her. I
couldn't keep that secret. And when I
didn't tell my father the truth that he
had cancer because my mother and his two
elder sisters and the and the doctor and
everybody who was the grown-up to
18-year-old Mandy said, "You mustn't
tell daddy cuz he had an earlier
accident where he broke his neck and it
was very traumatic for him when he was
like 17. And if you tell him he has
cancer, he'll probably take his life."
So, I put myself in the position to do
what the grown-up said, and I never got
to sit with my father to tell him the
truth of his condition. And when we lied
to him and told him he had hepatitis, my
father was not a [__] idiot. He knew
he didn't have hepatitis in 5 seconds.
And we never got that moment. And you
don't get it back.
>> And I'll never forgive myself for it.
And the way I deal with it is I try to
be truthful to you, to my wife, to my
son, to my audience, and to the world.
And and it is
it is not hard. It is not hard to be
truthful.
>> I never I never heard that about
Grandpa. I never heard that you guys
told him he had hepatitis. I didn't know
that was part of that story.
>> I thought I told you a million times,
but maybe you didn't, maybe I didn't. I
don't I Yeah. Yeah. That's exactly what
happened. I wish to God I could answer
any of your questions without getting so
intense. I don't know how to do it. I
wish I could
>> wait getting maybe
you you could help me bring this
question home.
>> Let me get out the fire.
>> I mean the truth, you know. Is there is
there No. Is there do you just in your
own memory is there,
>> you know, sort of a moment that you
think kind of encapsulates what your
family is about?
>> No, I think we're just as messy and
complex and contradictory as like any
other family that's trying to get along,
trying to understand ourselves and each
other. And um kind of the pathway I
think
towards having more peace and less
misunderstanding is like trying to talk
to each other about our [__] when we
have problems with each other. I don't
think there's a singular moment. I don't
think there's a singular saying. I think
it's just a big swirling
um beautiful mess. I want to thank all
three of you for letting me and and our
audience sit with you and your various
feelings of discomfort and comfort and
being a family. So, so thank you for
taking the time. I really appreciate it.
>> When's the next session, David?
>> Well, then I start charging.
[Music]